---
layout: post
title:  "Transformations: Using the Mirror Function"
date:   1111-04-03
last_modified_at: 2023-06-30
categories: [OpenSCAD]
tags: [Bonus]
---
<br>

## Learning Objectives
By the end of this lesson, students should be able to:
1. Understand the concept of mirroring in OpenSCAD.
2. Use the `mirror` function to create symmetrical models.
3. Apply the `mirror` function to manipulate objects' positions in the 3D space.

<br><br>

## Mirroring Objects in OpenSCAD
Mirroring is a common technique used in 3D modeling to create symmetrical shapes or to change the orientation of an object. In OpenSCAD, the `mirror` function allows us to transform an object into a mirror image of itself across a plane that intersects the origin.

The argument to the `mirror` function specifies the normal vector of the mirror plane (the vector perpendicular to the mirror plane). This argument is a list of three numbers representing the X, Y, and Z coordinates of the normal vector.

Remember, the `mirror` function does not create a copy of the original object but rather modifies it directly.

<br><br><br>

## Examples of Using the `mirror` Function
Here are some examples of using the `mirror` function:

1. Mirroring along the x-axis: 
```OpenSCAD
hand(); // original 
mirror([1,0,0]) hand();
```

2. Mirroring along a plane defined by the vector [1,1,0]: 
```OpenSCAD
hand(); // original 
mirror([1,1,0]) hand();
```

3. Mirroring along a plane defined by the vector [1,1,1]: 
```OpenSCAD
hand(); // original 
mirror([1,1,1]) hand();
```

4. Mirroring a rotated cube: 
```OpenSCAD
rotate([0,0,10]) cube([3,2,1]);
mirror([1,0,0]) translate([1,0,0]) rotate([0,0,10]) cube([3,2,1]);
```

In these examples, the `hand();` and `cube([3,2,1]);` functions create the original 3D objects, and the `mirror` function is used to create their mirror images.

<br><br><br>

## Review
In this lesson, you learned:
- What mirroring is in 3D modeling and how it is implemented in OpenSCAD.
- How to use the `mirror` function to create symmetrical objects or change the orientation of an object.
- The argument to the `mirror` function specifies the normal vector to the mirror plane.

<br><br><br>

## Resources
- [Follow along code](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/funkonaut/openSCAD_lessons/main/Lessons/Lesson%202/2_5_mirror_student.scad)
- [OpenSCAD Mirror Documentation](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/OpenSCAD_User_Manual/The_OpenSCAD_Language#mirror)
<br><br><br>