---
layout: post
title:  "Primitives: Creating Custom Primitives with Modules"
date:   1111-02-07
last_modified_at: 2023-06-28
categories: [OpenSCAD]
tags: [Lesson 2]
---
<br>

## Contents
{:.no_toc}
* Table of contents
{:toc}
<br><br>

## Learning Objectives
At the end of this lesson, you will be able to:

1. Understand the concept of modules in OpenSCAD.
2. Define and call your own modules.
3. Pass arguments to modules.
4. Apply transformations to modules.
<br><br><br>

## Understanding Modules in OpenSCAD
In OpenSCAD, a module is a portion of code that you can define so you don't have to type it out every time. It can be seen as a custom primitive shape. OpenSCAD's default primitive shapes, like cube, sphere, and cylinder, are all modules that have been pre-defined for you.
<br><br><br>

## Defining Your First Module
You can define a module in OpenSCAD using the `module` keyword, followed by a name and optional arguments. For example:

```
module my_first_module_name(an_argument, like_size, etc){
  cube([an_argument, like_size, etc], center=true);
}
```

After defining a module, you won't see any immediate change in your preview because you need to call the module to actually create the shape.
<br><br><br>

## Calling a Module
You can call a module just like you would call any other OpenSCAD shape. For example, to call the module you defined earlier, you would use the following line of code:

```
my_first_module_name(1, 1, 1);
```

Note that the numbers in the parentheses are arguments that match the ones you defined in the module. The argument order matters!
<br><br><br>

## Note on Module Arguments
If you do not include the correct arguments when you call your module, you will receive a warning. Always ensure that the arguments in your module definition match with the ones that you use to call the module. You can check the error log (press alt > w > l and tab around) to hear the warnings and find out what is wrong.
<br><br><br>

## Applying Transformations to Modules
You can treat modules just like shapes, meaning that transformation commands such as `translate` will work with them. For example:

```
translate([1, 1, 1])
my_first_module_name(1, 1, 1);
```
<br><br><br>

## Practice Problems
1. Create and call a module that makes a cylinder with arguments `h` for height and `w` for width. Translate your shape in any direction(s) after calling it.
2. Create and call a module that makes a cone with arguments for the cone's width and height. Translate your shape in any direction(s) after calling it.
3. Create and call a bead module with arguments for the hole width and the bead size.
4. Create and call a soda can module.
<br><br><br>

## Review
In this lesson you learned:
- What modules are in OpenSCAD and why they are useful.
- How to define and call your own modules.
- The importance of correctly using arguments in your modules.
- That you can apply transformations to your modules
<br><br><br>
