---
layout: post
title:  "Introduction to 3D Printing"
date: 1113-01-01
last_modified_at: 2023-06-14
categories: [Fabrication Lab]
tags: [3D Printing]
---
<br>

## Contents
{:.no_toc}
* Table of contents
{:toc}
<br><br>

## Learning Objectives
By the end of this lesson, students should be able to:
1. Understand the basics of how 3D printing works.
2. Identify the steps involved in preparing a model for 3D printing.
3. Operate a 3D printer safely and effectively.
<br><br>

## Introduction to 3D Printing
3D printing, also known as additive manufacturing, is a process that creates a physical object from a digital design. The technology works by layering material until the object is fully formed. Materials commonly used include plastic, resin, metal, and more.
<br><br>
There are various types of 3D printing, but the most commonly used method in schools and homes is called Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM). This method works by heating a plastic filament to its melting point and then extruding it, layer by layer, to create a three-dimensional object.
<br><br><br>

## Using a 3D Printer
Operating a 3D printer involves several key steps:
- [**Designing or Obtaining a Model**](): 3D prints start with a digital 3D model, which can be created using 3D modeling software or downloaded from an online repository. Models must be in a format that the 3D printer can understand, typically .STL or .OBJ.
- **Slicing the Model**: Once you have a 3D model, you need to prepare it for printing using software called a slicer. The slicer converts the 3D model into a series of thin layers and generates the instructions or G-CODE (or gcode) that the printer will use to create each layer.
- **Setting Up the Printer**: This includes loading the filament, calibrating the printer (which may involve leveling the print bed), and preheating the printer to the correct temperature.
- **Printing**: Once the printer is set up and the sliced model is loaded, the print can begin. The This step can take anywhere from minutes to many hours, depending on the size and complexity of the object.
- **Post-Processing**: After the print is complete, there may be some cleanup or finishing work required. This could include removing support structures, sanding rough edges, or applying a finish to the object.
<br><br><br>

## Review
In this lesson, you learned:
- The basics of how 3D printing works, and specifically how Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) printing works.
- The steps involved in 3D printing, including designing or obtaining a model, slicing the model, setting up the printer, printing, and post-processing.
<br><br><br>

## Resources
- [Thingiverse](https://www.thingiverse.com/) - a repository of 3D models ready for printing.
- [Printables](https://www.printables.com/) - another repository of 3D models.
- [Prusa Slicer](https://help.prusa3d.com/article/download-prusaslicer_2220) - a free and open source slicer software that is compatible with many 3D printers.
<br><br><br>
